---
layout: post
title: "More Textbook DP Problems"
date: 2018-03-24 00:00:00 -0600
category: Tech
tags: DP
cover: /assets/more_dp_cover.png
math: true
---

### Introduction

I remember when I first learned about dynamic programming, the professor introduced it through Fibonacci numbers. The recurrence of Fibonacci numbers is:

$$F(n) = F(n - 1) + F(n - 2)$$

$$F(1) = F(2) = 1$$

$$F(n)$$ is the $$n$$th Fibonacci number. When we try to programmatically unroll the recurrence, there would be lots of overlapping sub-problems, e.g.:

$$F(n) = F(n - 1) + F(n - 2) = F(n - 2) + F(n - 3) + F(n - 3) + F(n - 4)$$

Above $$F(n - 3)$$ would be calculated twice in the recursion process. And then the professor introduced memoization. When $$F(n - 3)$$ is first calculated, its value can be stored and simply retrieved the next time we need this value.

Thinking back on this introduction on DP, it's probably a really bad way to introduce DP. Many CS courses introduced the concept of recursion before DP, which does not really make sense. In many cases, DP is a more natural and efficient way of problem solving. When we first learned Fibonacci series on the Math class, how did the teacher tell us how to calculate the $$n$$th Fibonacci number? By adding from the two previous numbers, which we have initially as $$1$$ and $$1$$. This most natural approach, is Fibonacci calculation in its most efficient form. It's time complexcity is $$O(n)$$ and space complexcity $$O(1)$$. But the recursive method, without memoization, needs exponential time, and with memoization, still needs an additional $$O(n)$$ space. So why go top-down recursive memoization while we can do bottom-up DP?

#### Wildcard Matching

Problem description: https://leetcode.com/problems/wildcard-matching/description/

We build bottom-up the matching boolean for any two of the prefix strings from pattern and string, and use the existing solutions to deduce the new matching boolean. Direction is arbitrary: we could also use suffix, as long as the two are in the same direction. Simply put: Divide and conquer bottom-up fashion.

```c++
class Solution {
public:
    bool isMatch(string s, string p) {
    	int m = p.size(), n = s.size();
    	vector<vector<bool>> dp(m + 1, vector<bool>(n + 1, 0));
    	dp[0][0] = 1;
    	for (int i = 1; i <= m; ++i) {
    		if (p[i - 1] != '*')
    			break;
    		dp[i][0] = 1;
    	}
    	for (int i = 1; i <= m; ++i)
    		for (int j = 1; j <= n; ++j) {
    			if (p[i - 1] == s[j - 1] || p[i - 1] == '?')
    				dp[i][j] = dp[i - 1][j - 1];
    			else if (p[i - 1] == '*')
    				dp[i][j] = dp[i - 1][j] || dp[i][j - 1];
    		}
    	return dp[m][n];
    }
};
```

#### Regex Matching

Problem description: https://leetcode.com/problems/regular-expression-matching/description/

This problem is a trickier variant of wildcard matching, but not by much. The only catch here is the initialization of the memoization structure: since an asterisk only follows a normal character, we just check for every two characters of the regex and while an asterisk exists, it can be matched to an empty string.

```c++
class Solution {
public:
    bool isMatch(string s, string p) {
    	int m = p.size(), n = s.size();
    	vector<vector<bool>> dp(m + 1, vector<bool>(n + 1, 0));
    	dp[0][0] = 1;
    	for (int i = 1; i < m; i += 2) {
    		if (p[i] != '*')
    			break;
    		dp[i + 1][0] = 1;
    	}
    	for (int i = 1; i <= m; ++i)
    		for (int j = 1; j <= n; ++j) {
    			if (p[i - 1] == s[j - 1] || p[i - 1] == '.')
    				dp[i][j] = dp[i - 1][j - 1];
    			else if (p[i - 1] == '*') {
    				// note that i is guaranteed to be greater than 1 if input is valid
    				if (p[i - 2] == s[j - 1] || p[i - 2] == '.')
    					dp[i][j] = dp[i][j - 1] || dp[i - 2][j] || dp[i - 2][j - 1];
    				else
    					dp[i][j] = dp[i - 2][j];
    			}
    		}
    	return dp[m][n];
    }
};
```

#### Decode ways

Problem description: https://leetcode.com/problems/decode-ways/description/

This problem is reminiscient of the classic Fibonacci problem: a $$O(1)$$ space complexicty and $$O(n)$$ time complexicity solution. It's similar because only the last two states of the DP need to be kept. Another similar problem would be the classic "how many ways to climb a stair using one-step and two-step". The key to and most tricky part of this problem is not DP, but all the cases about the digits: when the two-digit can be counted as a radix-10 number in $$[1, 26]$$ and when it cannot.

```c++
class Solution {
public:
    int numDecodings(string s) {
    	if (s.empty() || s[0] == '0')
    		return 0;
    	int n = s.size(), prev = 1, curr = 1;
    	for (int i = 1; i < n; ++i) {
    		int tmp;
            if (s[i] == '0')
                tmp = (s[i - 1] == '1' || s[i - 1] == '2') ? prev : 0;
    		else if (s[i - 1] == '1')
    			tmp = prev + curr;
    		else if (s[i - 1] == '2')
    			tmp = (s[i] > '6') ? curr : prev + curr;
    		else
    			tmp = curr; // 0 or greater than 6
    		prev = curr;
    		curr = tmp;
    	}
    	return curr;
    }
};
```

#### Decode ways II

Problem description: https://leetcode.com/problems/decode-ways-ii/description/

This problem is a *huge* upgrade from its easier variant. For this problem the DP space complexicity can also be optimized from $$O(n)$$ to $$O(1)$$, but the transition equation set behind it is much more complex. I'm thinking of leaving it to its own post.

### End

Even though DP in my mind is the more natural approach, figuring out the DP states and transitions and implement them upon first encountering the problems can be intellectually challenging. But from my experience, the key is to start thinking about what procedural information, or states, you can store and re-use in the process of calculation, and then start thinking if there exists some transitions that link them backwards.

Signing off.